notes.md, before:

# Project Notes

I will use this file for project notes. Since I'm just learning, I will explicitly go through the problem solving steps as outlined in The Odin Project.

It's worth noting that the project instructions break the proble (creating a rock, paper, scissors game where the user plays against the commputer) into small problems which are the steps in the instructions. I attempt to break down these small problems into even smaller problems to practice the problem solving process. Admittedly I'm stretching things a bit as the small problems are already pretty bite sized. All good though!!

## Step 2: Write the logic to get the computer choice.
1. Understand the Problem
    - Create a function named `getComputerChoice` that randomly `return`'s one of the following string values: "rock", "paper", or "scissors". 
2. Plan
    - Does this function have a user intervace? **No**
    - What inputs will this function have? **None**
    - What is the desired output?
        - One of the following string outputs "rock", "paper", or "scissors"
    - What are the steps necessary to return the desired output?
        Call function `getComputerChoice`
        Create a variable called `computerChoice` of type `string` with an which is empty.
        Create a variable called `randomNum` of type `Number` with a random value greater or equal to zero and less than one. Generate this random value using the `Math.random` method.
        If `randomNum` is less than 1/3
            assign `computerChoice` a value of "rock"
        else if `randomNum` is less than 2/3
            assign `computerChoice` a value of "paper"
        else
            assign `computerChoice` a value of "scissors"
        
        return `computerChoice`
3. Divide and conquer, i.e., break the big problem into smaller sub-problems and solve these one-by-one

The big problem here isn't that big so there only a few *obvious* sub-problems.
    - First problem: How to assign a random number using `Math.random` to the variable `randomNum`
    - 2nd problem: How to create conditional output based on the value of `randomNum`.

## Step 3: Write the logic to get the human choice.
1. Understand the problem
    - Create a function named `getHumanChoice` that takes the user choice and returns it under the assumption that the user will always enter a valid choice, i.e., rock, paper, or scissors.
2. Plan
    - Does this function have a user interface?
        - The user interface will consiste of build in browser elemets, e.g., an input box automatically generated wihen using the `prompt` method.
    - What inputs will this function have?
        - The user will input their choice of paper, rock or scissors.
    - What is the desired output?
        - The choice the user input.
    - What are the steps necessary to return the desired outputs?
        Call function `getHumanChoice`
        Create a variable called `humanChoice` of type `string` with a value equal to the string value entered by the user.
        Return the `humanChoice`
3. Divide and conquer

The problem here is really a sub-problem. How do you prompt the user to enter a string value? Once you figure that out, simply assign the value to the `humanChoice` variable and return that variable.

## Step 4: Declare the players score variables
This is as simpole as it gets. Literally declare two variables, `humanScore` and `computerScore` and initialize them with a value of `0`. 

## Step 5: Write teh logic to play a single round
1. Understand the problem
    - Write a function that takes human and computer choices as arguments, plays a single round of "rock, paper, scissors", increments the round winners score and logs a winner announcement.
2. Plan
    - Does this function have a user interface?
        -  No. Other functions generate the arguments and the console is used for output.
    - What inputs will the function have?
        - `humanChoice`, which is the output of the function `getHumanChoice`
        - `computerChoice`, which is the output of the function `getComputerChoice`
    - What is the desired output?
        - The winner of one round of rock, paper, scissors between the player (human) and the computer.
    - What are other relevant requirements and constraints?
        - Make the `humanChoice` functions parameter case-inseensitive so that players can input "rock", "ROCK", "RocK", or other variations.
        - Make three variations of messages for the three possible outcomes: the player wins, the player loses, it is a tie. 
            - "You win! Rock beats Scissors."
            - "You loose! Paper beats Rock."
            - "It's a tie! You both chose Rock."
        - Increment the humanScore or computerScore variables based on the round winner.
    - What are the steps necessary to achieve the desired outputs?
        - Call function `playRound` with two arguments `humanChoice` and `computerChoice` representing the choice each player makes in a game of rock, paper, scissors.
        - Declare variable `roundMessage` of type String and value `""`.
        - If `humanChoice` is "rock" AND `computerChoice` is "scissors" OR `humanChoice` is "paper" AND `computerChoice` is "rock" OR `humanChoice` is "scissors" AND `computerChoice` is "paper"
            `roundMessage` equals "You win! `humanChoice` beats `computerChoice`."
            `humanScore` equals `humanScore` plus `1`
        else if `computerChoice` is "rock" AND `humanChoice` is "scissors" OR `computerChoice` is "paper" AND `humanChoice` is "rock" OR `computerChoice` is "scissors" AND `humanChoice` is "paper"
            `roundMessage` equals "You loose! `computerChoice` beats `humanChoice`."
            `computerScore` equals `computerScore` plus `1`
        else `roundMessage` equals "It's a tie! You both chose `humanChoice`."
        - output `roundMessage` to the console

Commit message:

Complete step 6 and play 5 rounds of the game
Create the playGame function and add counter variables so that five
rounds of Rock, Paper, Scissors can be played. The game was done using
recursion.

notes.md, after:

# Project Notes

I will use this file for project notes. Since I'm just learning, I will explicitly go through the problem solving steps as outlined in The Odin Project.

It's worth noting that the project instructions break the proble (creating a rock, paper, scissors game where the user plays against the commputer) into small problems which are the steps in the instructions. I attempt to break down these small problems into even smaller problems to practice the problem solving process. Admittedly I'm stretching things a bit as the small problems are already pretty bite sized. All good though!!

## Step 2: Write the logic to get the computer choice.
1. Understand the Problem
    - Create a function named `getComputerChoice` that randomly `return`'s one of the following string values: "rock", "paper", or "scissors". 
2. Plan
    - Does this function have a user intervace? **No**
    - What inputs will this function have? **None**
    - What is the desired output?
        - One of the following string outputs "rock", "paper", or "scissors"
    - What are the steps necessary to return the desired output?
        Call function `getComputerChoice`
        Create a variable called `computerChoice` of type `string` with an which is empty.
        Create a variable called `randomNum` of type `Number` with a random value greater or equal to zero and less than one. Generate this random value using the `Math.random` method.
        If `randomNum` is less than 1/3
            assign `computerChoice` a value of "rock"
        else if `randomNum` is less than 2/3
            assign `computerChoice` a value of "paper"
        else
            assign `computerChoice` a value of "scissors"
        
        return `computerChoice`
3. Divide and conquer, i.e., break the big problem into smaller sub-problems and solve these one-by-one

The big problem here isn't that big so there only a few *obvious* sub-problems.
    - First problem: How to assign a random number using `Math.random` to the variable `randomNum`
    - 2nd problem: How to create conditional output based on the value of `randomNum`.

## Step 3: Write the logic to get the human choice.
1. Understand the problem
    - Create a function named `getHumanChoice` that takes the user choice and returns it under the assumption that the user will always enter a valid choice, i.e., rock, paper, or scissors.
2. Plan
    - Does this function have a user interface?
        - The user interface will consiste of build in browser elemets, e.g., an input box automatically generated wihen using the `prompt` method.
    - What inputs will this function have?
        - The user will input their choice of paper, rock or scissors.
    - What is the desired output?
        - The choice the user input.
    - What are the steps necessary to return the desired outputs?
        Call function `getHumanChoice`
        Create a variable called `humanChoice` of type `string` with a value equal to the string value entered by the user.
        Return the `humanChoice`
3. Divide and conquer

The problem here is really a sub-problem. How do you prompt the user to enter a string value? Once you figure that out, simply assign the value to the `humanChoice` variable and return that variable.

## Step 4: Declare the players score variables
This is as simpole as it gets. Literally declare two variables, `humanScore` and `computerScore` and initialize them with a value of `0`. 

## Step 5: Write the logic to play a single round
1. Understand the problem
    - Write a function that takes human and computer choices as arguments, plays a single round of "rock, paper, scissors", increments the round winners score and logs a winner announcement.
2. Plan
    - Does this function have a user interface?
        -  No. Other functions generate the arguments and the console is used for output.
    - What inputs will the function have?
        - `humanChoice`, which is the output of the function `getHumanChoice`
        - `computerChoice`, which is the output of the function `getComputerChoice`
    - What is the desired output?
        - The winner of one round of rock, paper, scissors between the player (human) and the computer.
    - What are other relevant requirements and constraints?
        - Make the `humanChoice` functions parameter case-inseensitive so that players can input "rock", "ROCK", "RocK", or other variations.
        - Make three variations of messages for the three possible outcomes: the player wins, the player loses, it is a tie. 
            - "You win! Rock beats Scissors."
            - "You loose! Paper beats Rock."
            - "It's a tie! You both chose Rock."
        - Increment the humanScore or computerScore variables based on the round winner.
    - What are the steps necessary to achieve the desired outputs?
        - Call function `playRound` with two arguments `humanChoice` and `computerChoice` representing the choice each player makes in a game of rock, paper, scissors.
        - Declare variable `roundMessage` of type String and value `""`.
        - If `humanChoice` is "rock" AND `computerChoice` is "scissors" OR `humanChoice` is "paper" AND `computerChoice` is "rock" OR `humanChoice` is "scissors" AND `computerChoice` is "paper"
            `roundMessage` equals "You win! `humanChoice` beats `computerChoice`."
            `humanScore` equals `humanScore` plus `1`
        else if `computerChoice` is "rock" AND `humanChoice` is "scissors" OR `computerChoice` is "paper" AND `humanChoice` is "rock" OR `computerChoice` is "scissors" AND `humanChoice` is "paper"
            `roundMessage` equals "You loose! `computerChoice` beats `humanChoice`."
            `computerScore` equals `computerScore` plus `1`
        else `roundMessage` equals "It's a tie! You both chose `humanChoice`."
        - output `roundMessage` to the console

## Step 6: Write teh logic to play the entire game
1. Undertand the prolem
    - A human player plays 5 rounds of rock, paper, scissors against the computer. The score is tracked and a winner is declared at the end of the five rounds.
2. Plan
    - Does the game have a user interface?
         - No, the game is played in the console and the built uses the browsers built in prompt and dialogue boxes, along with the console for input and output.
    - What input will the program have?
        - The only input is the users choice of Rock, Paper, or Scissors in each round of play.
    - What's the desired output?
        - After each round of play, a message indicating the result of the round (win, loose or draw) and the current score.
        - At the end of the game (5 rounds) indicate the winner, or a tie.
    - Given the inputs, what are teh sptes necessary to return the desired out put. 
        A this stage most of the program has been built. Since we have not coverd loops, I will use recursion. I will then create the same with a for loop. 
        - create a global variable called `roundCount` of type number and set it equal to `0`
        - Create a function `playGame` which
            - increment the round counter by one
            - call `playRound`
                - call `getHumanChoice` and `getComputerChoice`
                - determine a winner or tie, increment the score accordingly and output a message.
            - if roundCount is less than 6
                Call `playGame`
                Otherwise return the score and declare a winner, or a tie.
3. Divide and conquer
Things have already been broken down into smaller problems. I'm simply going to tackle `playGame`.
